A NoSQL (often interpreted as Not only SQL) database provides a mechanism for storage and retrieval of data that is modeled in means other than the tabular relations used in relational databases. Motivations for this approach include simplicity of design, horizontal scaling, and finer control over availability. The data structures used by NoSQL databases (e.g. key-value, graph, or document) differ from those used in relational databases, making some operations faster in NoSQL and others faster in relational databases. The particular suitability of a given NoSQL database depends on the problem it must solve.
Examples of NoSQL databases:
Session Store - managing session information using relational technology has been a pain point for many Web application developers, especially as applications have grown in scale. In those cases, a global session store, one that manages session information for each user who visits the Website is the right approach, and NoSQL has emerged as one of the best options for storing Web app session information. This is due in part to the key value storing properties of NoSQL databases: The unstructured nature of session data is easier to store in a schema-less document than in a structured (and more rigid) RDBMS record. In addition, low-latency access to session data is critical for ensuring a great user experience.
User Profile Store - all Web applications require user profiles and the ability to log in. A global user profile store is another example of where the key value characteristics of NoSQL come into play. A NoSQL database can store the user IDs, user preferences, multiple ID mappings and additional user information so that the app can quickly look up a user and authenticate access. Given the importance of this functionality to any Web app, the "always on" and scale-out characteristics of NoSQL are essential. TuneWiki recently drafted a blog post about how it uses NoSQL as a user profile store.
Mobile Applications - app developers' ability to update and enhance mobile apps quickly and without service disruption is critical to user adoption and loyalty. Because NoSQL databases can store user information and application content in a schema-less format, developers can quickly modify apps without major database infrastructure changes. That means users experience no interruption to application uptime. Some popular companies that take advantage of NoSQL for their mobile apps are Kobo and Playtika, both of which serve millions of users across the globe.
E-Commerce - E-commerce companies live and die by seasonal swings. Come Christmastime, users are scrambling to purchase last-minute gifts online or through mobile purchasing apps, creating a massive spike in usage. The ability to handle these spikes without overinvesting in infrastructure is critical to ensuring a pleasing shopper experience and minimizing abandoned purchase transactions (and lost revenue). NoSQL is a good fit for this use pattern because of its dynamic scalability (the ability to scale up to accommodate increased user activity and to scale down as user activity subsides). Companies such as The Hut Group depend on NoSQL to get them through the holiday rush.